The Culture of Fear
By Noam Chomsky
Preface to Javier Giraldo, Colombia: The Genocidal Democracy, Common Courage Press, July 1996

North American readers of Father Giraldo's documentation of the reign of terror that engulfed Colombia during the "Dirty War" waged by the state security forces and their paramilitary associates from the early 1980s should draw two conclusions. The first is that Colombia's "democra-tatorship," as Eduardo Galeano termed this amalgam of democratic forms and totalitarian terror, has managed to compile the worst human rights record in the hemisphere in recent years, no small achievement when one considers the competition. The second is that Colombia has had accessories in crime, primary among them the government of the United States, though Britain, Israel, Germany, and others have also helped to train and arm the assassins and torturers of the narco-military-landowner network that maintains "stability" in a country that is rich in promise, and a nightmare for many of its people.

In July 1989, the U.S. State Department announced plans for subsidized sales of military equipment to Colombia, allegedly "for antinarcotics purposes." The sales were "justified" by the fact that "Colombia has a democratic form of government and does not exhibit a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights."

A few months before, the Commission of Justice and Peace that Father Giraldo heads had published a report documenting atrocities in the first part of 1988, including over 3,000 politically-motivated killings, 273 in "social cleansing" campaigns. Political killings averaged eight a day, with seven people murdered in their homes or in the street and one "disappeared."

Citing this report, the Washington Office on Latin America (WOLA) added that "the vast majority of those who have disappeared in recent years are grass-roots organizers, peasant or union leaders, leftist politicians, human rights workers and other activists," over 1500 by the time of the State Department's praise for Colombia's democracy and its respect for human rights. During the 1988 electoral campaigns, 19 of 87 mayoral candidates of the sole independent political party, the UP, were assassinated, along with over 100 of its other candidates. The Central Organization of Workers, a coalition of trade unions formed in 1986, had by then lost over 230 members, most of them found dead after brutal torture.

But the "democratic form of government" emerged without stain, and with no "consistent pattern of gross violations" of human rights.

By the time of the State Department's report, the practices it found praiseworthy were being more efficiently implemented. Political killings in 1988 and 1989 rose to 11 a day, the Colombian branch of the Andean Commission of Jurists reported. From 1988 through early 1992, 9,500 people were assassinated for political reasons along with 830 disappearances and 313 massacres (between 1988 and 1990) of peasants and poor people.

Throughout these years, as usual, the primary victims of state terror were peasants. In 1988, grassroots organizations in one southern department reported a "campaign of total annihilation and scorched earth, Vietnam-style," conducted by the military forces "in a most criminal manner, with assassinations of men, women, elderly and children. Homes and crops are burned, obligating the peasants to leave their lands." Also in 1988 the government of Colombia established a new judicial regime that called for "total war against the internal enemy." It authorized "maximal criminalization of the political and social opposition," a European-Latin American Inquiry reported in Brussels, reviewing "the consolidation of state terror in Colombia."

As the State Department report appeared a year after these events, the Colombian Minister of Defense again articulated the doctrine of "total war" by state power "in the political, economic, and social arenas." Guerrillas were the official targets, but as a high military official had observed in 1987, their organizations were of minor importance: "the real danger," he explained, is "what the insurgents have called the political and psychological war," the efforts "to control the popular elements" and "to manipulate the masses." The "subversives" hope to influence unions, universities, media, and so on, and the government must counter this "war" with its own "total war in the political, economic, and social arenas."

Reviewing doctrine and practice, the Brussels study concludes realistically that the "internal enemy" of the state terrorist apparatus extends to "labor organizations, popular movements, indigenous organizations, oppositional political parties, peasant movements, intellectual sectors, religious currents, youth and student groups, neighborhood organizations," indeed any group that must be secured against undesirable influences. "Every individual who in one or another manner supports the goals of the enemy must be considered a traitor and treated in that manner," a Colombian military manual prescribes.

The manual dates from 1963. At that time, violence in Colombia was coming to be "exacerbated by external factors," the president of the Colombian Permanent Committee for Human Rights, former Minister of Foreign Affairs Alfredo Vasquez Carrizosa, wrote some years later, reviewing the outcome. "During the Kennedy administration," he continues, Washington "took great pains to transform our regular armies into counterinsurgency brigades, accepting the new strategy of the death squads."

These initiatives "ushered in what is known in Latin America as the National Security Doctrine, . . . not defense against an external enemy, but a way to make the military establishment the masters of the game . . . [with] the right to combat the internal enemy, as set forth in the Brazilian doctrine, and the Colombian doctrine: it is the right to fight and to exterminate social workers, trade unionists, men and women who are not supportive of the establishment, and who are assumed to be communist extremists."

The "Dirty War" escalated in the early 1980s — not only in Colombia — as the Reagan administration extended these programs throughout the region, leaving it devastated, strewn with hundreds of thousands of corpses and tortured and mutilated people who might otherwise have been insufficiently supportive of the establishment, perhaps even influenced by "subversives."

North Americans should never allow themselves to forget the origins of "the Brazilian doctrine, the Argentine doctrine, the Uruguayan doctrine, the Colombian doctrine," and others like them. They were crafted right here, then adapted by students trained and equipped right here. The basic guidelines are spelled out in U.S. manuals of counterinsurgency and "low intensity conflict."

These are euphemisms, technical terms for state terror, a fact well known in Latin America. When Archbishop Oscar Romero wrote to President Carter in 1980 shortly before his assassination, vainly pleading with him to end U.S. support for the state terrorist, he informed the rector of the Jesuit University, Father Ellacuria, that he was prompted "by the new concept of special warfare, which consists in murderously eliminating every endeavor of the popular organizations under the allegation of Communism or terrorism." So Father Ellacuria reported shortly before he was assassinated by the same hands a decade later.

The agents of state terror are the beneficiaries of U.S. training designed to ensure that they have an "understanding of, and orientation toward, U.S. objectives," Defense Secretary Robert McNamera informed National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy in 1965. This is a matter of particular importance "in the Latin American cultural environment," where it is recognized that the military must be prepared to "remove government leaders from office, whenever, in the judgment of the military, the conduct of these leaders is injurious to the welfare of the nation."

When the State Department announced new arms shipments as a reward for Colombia's achievements in human rights and democracy, it surely had access to the record of atrocities that had been compiled by the leading international and Colombian human rights organizations. It was fully aware of the U.S. role in establishing and maintaining the regime of terror and oppression. The example is, unfortunately, typical of a pattern that hardly varies, as can be readily verified.

Israeli physician Ruchama Marton, who has been at the forefront of investigation of the use of torture by the security forces of her own country, points out that while confessions obtained by torture are of course meaningless, the real purpose is not confession. Rather, it is silence, "silence induced by fear." "Fear is contagious," she continues, "and spreads to the other members of the oppressed group, to silence and paralyze them. To impose silence through violence is torture's real purpose, in the most profound and fundamental sense."

To impose silence on the internal enemy is necessary in the "democra-tatorships" that U.S. policy has sought to impose on its domains. It is particularly important to impose silence in the region with the highest inequality in the world, thanks in no small measure to policies of the superpower that largely controls it.

It is necessary to impose silence and spread fear in countries like Colombia, where the top three percent of the landed elite own over 70% of arable land while 57% of the poorest farmers subsist on under 3% — a country where 40% of the population live in "absolute poverty," unable to satisfy basic subsistence needs according to an official government report in 1986, and 18% live in "absolute misery," unable to meet nutritional needs.

Throughout these grim years, nothing has been more inspiring than the courage and dedication of those who have sought to expose and overcome the culture of fear in their suffering countries. They have left martyrs, whose voices have been silenced by the powerful — yet another crime.

But they continue to struggle on. Father Giraldo's remarkable work and eloquent words should not only inspire us, but also impel us to act to bring these terrors to an end, as we can. His testimony here contains an "urgent appeal." It should be answered, but it does not go far enough. Our responsibilities extend well beyond. The fate of Colombians and many others hinges on our willingness and ability to recognize and meet them.
